♪♪
(men shouting, crying)
(men crying, groaning)
Jim will be home soon.
God willing.
Will I find him changed?
He's come this far.
That's what matters.
A pretty sight, is it not?
No shame in it.
As we sow, so shall we reap.
As my wife would no doubt
remind me.
If I can be of service.
Ah, you can.
Find a way
to restore me my mines,
my estate, my dignity.
Francis...
But no, today is your day.
First auction for Carnmore.
I wish you could join us.
George would disapprove.
I know how little you care for
his opinion, but you should.
I care for those
he seeks to ruin.
You'll never get it, Ross.
What?
Justice for all.
Fair wages would be a start.
Agh!
Damn these blisters!
You would speak with him?
It will keep.
♪♪
Gentlemen, gentlemen,
the auction is now open.
I've first to dispose
of a dole of ore
from Wheal Busy.
Wheal Busy ore, sold to
the Carnmore Copper Company
for six pounds, 17 shillings
and sixpence a ton.
Wheal Leisure, parcel
of red copper, 45 tons.
Sold to the Carnmore
Copper Company
for eight pounds,
two shillings a ton.
What name did you say?
Wheal Leisure.
No, sir, the buyers?
The Carnmore Copper Company.
United Mines, three doles
of ore, 50 tons apiece.
First parcel is sold to the
Carnmore Copper Company...
for seven pounds,
one shilling a ton.
Second parcel is sold to
the Carnmore Copper Company
for six pounds,
19 shillings a ton.
Sir, I dislike to intervene,
but may I say, I've never heard
of the Carnmore Copper Company.
CHAIRMAN: I am assured
it do exist, sir.
What proof have you
of its good faith?
Who stands guarantor for it?
Who is its agent?
As I thought, there's
something here not...
I'm the agent.
I've never heard
of your company.
Well, that's odd, since
the chairman's been talking
of little else since noon.
BLIGHT:
What is your purpose in bidding
for this quantity of copper?
The same as yours, sir,
to smelt and sell it
on the open market.
And who are the men
behind your company?
What are their names?
Do we know the names behind the
South Wales Smelting Company?
You know full well we came in
vouched for by the Warleggans.
Because you are the Warleggans.
You, Sir,
I don't know what your game is,
but it reeks!
CHAIRMAN:
Gentlemen, gentlemen, please!
Let the auction continue.
Here he come.
You see, Keven'?
I tamed him for you.
And Zacky Martin, do he waste
his days 'ticing starlings
or do he swag around the county
on Captain Poldark's business'?
Zacky's educated.
He can read.
Any fool can read.
I know you can.
It is no secret you could have
done better for yourself.
I was only glad you did pick me.
Not some highfalutin'
scholarly chap.
You may think
you've done well today.
Sir?
But we're on to you.
Believe me, you won't have it
your own way next time.
TONKIN: Riots in Bodmin now.
BLEWITT: Looting in Truro.
Every week, another mine closes.
BLIGHT: That's no
excuse to take the law
into their own hands.
Examples must be made.
And are.
Bodmin jail is now fit to burst.
And rife with fever.
BLEWITT: 'Tis as plain a death
sentence as you could wish, sir.
(screaming)
Both lungs are afflicted,
but under a strict regime
of goat's milk,
walking four miles a day,
sleeping out in the open
when it's fine...
Is she badly hurt?
Captain Poldark,
I can guess why you're here.
I should imagine not, ma'am.
You've heard the rumors
attaching to Miss Verity's
name again?
'Us, uh... hen.
From over there, to see, um...
Have you heard?
The Warleggans are giving
a ball.
Are we invited?
We are!
What a way to mark
your entrance into society!
What is it?
Well... what will I wear?
What shall I say, how...
How shall I know the new dances?
I'll help you!
When I return from town.
I'm expected there later today.
Expected?
Have you spoken to Francis?
You must.
I will, I will.
Did well, today, we did indeed.
That was the easy part.
CARY: You underestimated him.
I did no such thing.
You took him for one
of those overbred idiots
who trade on their name
instead of their wits.
Like his cousin.
GEORGE:
Ross is made of harder mettle.
Well, his company is a threat.
But if we knew the names
of its shareholders...
(winces)
You're being very brave.
You must stay in bed.
If you get up,
it may raise a fever.
Of course, sir.
I'll do anything you say, sir.
I never knew anyone
could be so kind.
(door opens and closes)
(thunder)
VERITY: Lisbon!
How I long to see it.
It'll enchant you.
The orange trees, the olive
groves, the endless sunlight...
Will you take me?
Are you a good sailor?
Oh, yes, indeed!
Though... I have never
actually been to sea.
(both laugh)
My quarters aboard
are not lavish.
I need no luxury.
To be free, to live my own life,
to be with you...
is all the riches I could wish.
So you will tell Francis?
Before the ball?
Perhaps we should not be seen
there together.
Unless I speak with him first.
Or let me.
No... it must be me.
I must find the right moment.
Then let it be soon, my love.
♪♪
(horse whinnies)
Judas!
This is a new device,
creeping in like a tomcat.
And how is my fair maiden?
The one invited
to the Warleggan ball?
That one, too.
Would it please you to go?
Oh, Ross, can I?
Beg pardon, sir. Ma'am.
Shall I serve supper?
Thank you, Jinny.
Have you heard from Jim?
Not since last month, sir,
but he was fair then.
FRANCIS:
So, I am to go to the ball
without a mine to my name,
my estate in ruins, and my wife
in a made-over dress?
For heaven's sake, Francis,
who can afford
new clothes these days?
Truly,
you imagine Demelza won't be
trotting out her one good dress
and not care a feather
what people say?
Well, she should,
and if she does not,
then she shows her ignorance.
You like Demelza.
Mmm. Mmm.
I do.
Doesn't alter the fact
that the connection does
our family no credit.
I'm grateful it's the only
unsuitable marriage
we're forced to endure.
What keeps you awake?
The mine, the smelting company.
Jim.
Is there news?
Rumors.
Has Verity said anything?
About Andrew Blarney?
Why?
There are rumors
she's meeting him again.
Is she?
I wouldn't like to say she is.
And I wouldn't like to say
she isn't.
In other words, you wouldn't
like to say anything at all.
Well...
Ross, what's given in confidence
isn't fair to repeat.
I can't pretend
I'm not disturbed.
(sighs)
I wonder how she met him again.
♪♪
Practice your steps.
I claim first dance at the ball.
(hammers clanking on metal)
"Us as we feared, Ross."
Fever's rife at Bodmin.
They're dropping like flies.
Whole mine's talking of it.
Say nothing to Jinny.
(knocking on door)
You're close to Jim?
I have known him
since he were a boy.
Were he my worst enemy, I'd not
wish jail pestilence on him.
(knocking)
Your arm is mending?
I came to see what
Dr. Enys could prescribe.
He's away with my husband
till tomorrow.
Mrs. Daniel...?
A word?
Hope do love a gossip.
And 'tis not wise
to give them cause.
What cause?
"Us said you have a roving eye."
And whose business is it
where my eye do light?
Well, some say
it might be their business,
should it light
on their husbands.
There's not a man in 50 miles
I'd look twice at.
Excepting one.
Mark?
Pardon my interference.
'Twas kindly meant.
You have a plan?
None whatsoever.
(knocking)
(Pounding)
Good evening to you, sir.
Dr. Enys is here to attend
on James Carter.
Eh?
What's that?
James Carter, the typhus.
Be so good as to let us in
so we may show you our papers.
There's not a moment
to lose, sir.
ROSS: This way, if you please, Dr.
Enys.
Much obliged to you.
JAILER: Now look, they say
there be fever down 'ere.
We'd be sick ourselves if we...
ROSS: Is this the cell?
DWIGHT: What an affront
to human dignity.
Is Jim Carter among you?
Where's your authority?
You must show your papers.
Jim?
Jim, can you hear me?
DWIGHT:
Perhaps he has been moved?
Are you there, Jim?
(rats squeaking, man moaning)
DWIGHT:
Dear God, look at his arm.
Open this cell. Eh'?
ROSS: This man needs
urgent medical attention.
We're taking him away.
Nay, he be serving his sentence.
Open this cell before
I have you dismissed
for neglecting your duty.
Give me the keys.
JAILER: You can't go in there.
It ain't safe. There's fever!
I could make over the bodice,
maybe add a little lace.
Just as you please.
So long as Francis thinks
it's new.
I'm sorry...
that he's been a disappointment.
You... speak to me
of disappointment?
Perhaps it's always the way.
In the first flush of love,
we think anything is possible.
We must both learn to lower
our expectations.
(groaning and wheezing)
Avoid his breath.
It will be deadly at this stage.
What chance does he have?
He might survive the fever,
but this arm...
Is it gangrene?
It must come off.
He won't survive.
I beg you to try.
I'll help you.
ROSS: Be brave now, Jim.
Think of Jinny waiting at home.
It's all right, Jinny...
(gasping): I'm coming home...
I'm coming home...
I'm coming home.
(baby fussing)
(crackling)
ROSS: We buried him by the sea.
If you'd seen his face,
Demelza...
I think he knew me.
He smiled
and tried to speak, but...
The magistrate
should have been there.
Smug, self-satisfied upholders
of the law.
And so-called gentlemen!
Who prize game
above honest working men.
He tried to feed his family.
How is that a crime?
By God, I could commit
murder myself.
Will there not be trouble?
That you broke the jail
and helped a prisoner escape?
Let there be.
I welcome it.
I could almost be induced to go
amongst them tonight to the ball
if I thought I might infect
them.
You mean not to go, then?
How could we?
To dance and smile
at the very men to blame
for Jim's death?
No, no...
We could not go, I do see that.
(door opens)
Parcel come for... Mistress.
'Tis from the dressmakers.
It is a mistake.
I called on my way
to Bodmin to order it.
It seems like 100 years ago now.
Oh.
Could I see it?
If you've the interest.
It will do for some time
in the future.
Oh, Ross...
(knocking)
I couldn't sleep.
All last night,
I was thinking of you
giving me something
to ease the pain.
Uh, please wait here,
I'll fetch you something.
Miss Verity, sir.
Oh, my dears, I heard about Jim.
Say nothing, Verity.
If I'm forced to relive it,
I'm like to explode.
You must compose yourself
before the ball.
Do you know
who will attend this ball?
Every single one of those men
who condemned Jim to die.
So how do you imagine
I could go among them?
Because you must go among them.
Your move in forcing the jail
was reckless and unlawful.
Your presence among these people
tonight will remind them
that you are one of them,
a gentleman.
It may make them think twice
before moving against you.
Your arguments disgust me.
They disgust me, too.
But you have more than yourself
to consider now.
My wife and child...
Would suffer.
As Jinny suffers.
(sighs deeply)
Justice is a fine thing,
is it not?
(echoes of guests chattering)
Ross!
Where are you going?
To acquaint myself with as much
brandy as George can supply.
We shouldn't have come.
Ross hasn't been sober since
he got back from Bodmin.
For you, I think.
It's from Ross.
But how can I wear it?
With Jim in the ground
and Jinny all bereft.
You cannot help them, my dear.
But you can try to keep a lid
on that powderkeg below.
(dance music playing)
ls there a war on?
(chuckles)
The Poldark cousins seem
hell-bent on battle.
I cannot speak for Ross,
but Francis is most definitely
at odds with all the world.
(both chuckle)
There, now.
Look how lovely you look.
Let us go down.
It will take us both
to keep Ross in check.
You won't desert me?
I would not dream of such.
Oh, dear God!
I must go to him.
He must leave at once.
Dwight, I feared
I wouldn't know a soul.
Here is a gentleman eager
to make your acquaintance.
Sir Hugh Bodregun, may I present
Mistress Demelza Poldark.
Enys tells me we're neighbors.
How could I come to overlook
such a bloom, hmm?
I cannot account for it, sir.
Do you hunt, ma'am?
No, sir.
I have some sympathy
for the foxes.
(chuckles)
Please, Andrew...
Ross.
Hm'?
I've been singing your praises.
To whom?
Mr. Matthew Sanson.
He's keen to test his mettle
against you.
Oh, thank you.
I have no taste
for gaming tonight.
Oh, that's a pity.
Last time he played, he had
the better of the Poldarks.
I thought you might care
to level the scores.
He may try.
I'm here to escort my wife.
That being so, it wouldn't suit
my purpose to spend the evening
in a card room.
Which is your wife?
I should like the pleasure.
She's over there.
And she seems very well attended
by Sir Hugh Bodregun.
Might I suggest
a short game, just...
while the evening warms up?
As you wish.
Please.
Did you not hear?
Since Francis lost the mine,
that woman has thrown him over.
Now he can't even afford
a new dress for his wife.
And as for Ross, no doubt
regretting his marriage
to that hussy...
(dance music begins)
Andrew, I beg you to leave.
Francis will see you.
That's exactly what I wish.
Have it all out in the open.
I will not be ashamed
of our love.
Nor I!
But if we're seen together,
it will be a disaster.
Who's to say Francis
would make difficulties?
Has he not grown up?
Might he not have mellowed?
Let him once catch sight of you
and you will see
how much he's mellowed.
Who is that young person dancing
with Sir Hugh?
She's quite lovely,
don't you think?
That's Demelza, Mama.
Ross's wife.
The scullery maid!
I see no scullery maid, Mama.
Reverend Halse.
Will you join us?
What are the stakes?
A... guinea.
It's more than
my customary stake.
Perhaps you'd prefer to wait
for another table.
I think not.
I have as much right to call
the stakes as any here.
Half a guinea, let it be.
(music continues)
Still not dancing, Elizabeth?
What will people say?
Your first outing in months and
to be so neglected by Francis.
Elizabeth, will you grant me
the favor of the next dance?
How charming you
look tonight, ma'am.
I swear Elizabeth's place
will be taken
the moment I lead her away.
(sighs)
Wicked shame to have thrown her
away on a Poldark.
You did not return
my trump lead, sir.
It is an elementary principle
to return one's partner's lead.
Thank you, I'm acquainted with
the elementary principles.
ROSS: No doubt your partner has
all the principles
at his fingertips.
It's a general misfortune
he does not make
better use of them.
Manners were never
your strong suit, Poldark.
Who can only guess
at the bad humors
that come
from an ill-spent life?
Ill-spent?
And this from a justice
of the peace who combines
all the virtues of office except
perhaps justice and peace?
No doubt
the common people you mix with
have blunted your faculties
as to what may or may not be
said in polite society.
I agree, they alter one's
perspectives, sir.
You should try mixing
with such people.
It might enlarge your outlook.
I think I will find
another table.
Have you ever been
in a jail, sir'?
It's surprising the stench
30 or 40 of God's creatures
can give off
when confined to a squalid pit
for months on end
without drains, water,
physicians, care.
The matter of your performance
at Bodmin jail
has not gone unnoticed, sir.
There will shortly be a meeting
of the justices,
of whom, may I say, I am one.
Then pray convey this message:
That it would give me
great pleasure
to meet any of you
who can spare the time
from your high offices
and holy livings.
Especially those responsible
for the upkeep of Bodmin jail.
You offensive young drunkard!
You'll be hearing
from us presently.
Continue.
Come, Mr. Francis,
follow your cousin's lead.
Lay a stake
on the queen of spades.
Thank you, I've learned
never to stake on women.
Excuse me, I'll have a...
breath of air.
(music ends, applause)
You look ravishing tonight,
Elizabeth.
If I were a poet or a painter,
I could do you justice.
You're very kind, George,
but I'm afraid you have little
reward for your attentions.
I'm a dull creature these days.
That which is treasured
can never be dull.
You should venture out more.
And bring Francis, if you will.
To the gaming tables?
It's the only reward
for the end of Grambler,
that he sees less
of the green cloths
and more of his family.
If I were to promise
never to encourage
or even play with Francis again,
would that please you?
We both know he will
continue to play,
whether you encourage him
or not.
He cannot help himself.
Any more than I can.
Some... refreshment?
(sobbing)
I hope you will do me
the honor of allowing...
How dare you address me!
Francis!
Your sister deserves better.
I beg you, let us
resolve this peaceably...
Step aside!
Your sister is not
to be commanded.
Nor am I.
Then perhaps you will take this
as an inducement.
I forbid you ever
to see him again.
Er, no, thank you.
Excuse me, sirs.
I must speak with my cousin.
Oh, no, no, not so fast, missy.
I haven't had the pleasure
of my second dance.
Nor I, indeed.
Excuse me, sirs, I cannot stay.
We've been admiring
your gown, Demelza.
Mama thought it had come
from London
until Mrs. Treneglos
assured her to the contrary.
And how is your father, dear?
We've not seen him
since the christening.
No, ma'am, I'm sorry.
Father is overparticular
who he meets.
He despises me.
No.
And so he should.
I am to blame.
I should have told Francis
when I had the chance.
But I was timid.
It's the one weakness
Andrew cannot abide.
He will forgive you.
He left...
without a backward glance.
I shall never see him again.
Propose.
Two.
I hope you're as well
entertained as your wife.
Or had you forgot her existence?
Dangerous mistake.
Absentee husbands make
for wandering wives.
If you wish to retain our favor,
you'd do well to pay it
attention.
Ah! I'm determined, ma'am.
The next dance is mine.
ROSS: Forgive me.
Pardon me.
I came to see if you
require anything.
BODRUGAN: It's a bit
late to be showing
a lively concern
for your wife, isn't it?
Better a belated conscience
than none at all.
Hm!
DEMELZA: Perhaps I should
ask for an introduction,
as it's so long since we've met.
I hear you've been
well consoled in my absence.
Look at them all.
Overpainted, overdressed...
Overstuffed.
If these are my people,
I'm ashamed to belong to them.
Well, if you think all
the stupid, fat ignorants
are in your class,
then you're mistook.
I've lived long enough to know
that they're everywhere.
And you'll not right any wrongs
by blaming just these folk
for Jim dying.
Of course they're to blame!
For their ignorance,
their selfishness,
their arrogance...
And you'll not right any wrongs
by drinking and gaming
and leaving me
to fend for myself
at my very first ball!
If you behave like this,
you'll not come to another.
I'll not want to.
(dancers applaud as music ends)
Would you care to dance?
No, thank you.
Poldark's losing badly.
50 guineas?
Agreed.
I propose...
How many?
The book.
I'll take two.
Propose.
Accept.
Two.
I'll lay ten guineas.
Twenty.
I'll take it.
The luck of the devil.
This is a decent little piece.
Somewhat high priced.
I trust it keeps good time?
It never failed my grandfather.
Shall we continue?
And what do you intend
to play with?
Assets I can realize.
Ross, no.
Play with this if you must.
And what is this worth?
About 100.
(softly): Oh, Ross.
Well?
Deal.
He's met his match in Matthew.
Hm.
Shall we retire?
Another hour.
With what?
My stake in Wheal Leisure.
Ross, no.
I propose.
How many?
One.
I'll take the book.
Can you explain how you come
to have a card in your hand
before you drew one
from the pack?
You're mistaken.
I'd already drawn.
I rather think he had, Ross.
Oh, no, he had not.
He most certainly had not.
What the hell are you doing,
Ross?
George! Cary!
Will you permit this?!
I'm sorry for assaulting
your friend, George,
but if you insist on
entertaining such fellows,
you should at least
keep them on a leash.
Or perhaps you prefer your
guests to be ruined in silence?
When did you first know
he was cheating?
Almost at once.
But I wanted to be sure
before I challenged him.
Thank you.
Your exploits at Bodmin jail
were much discussed.
No doubt.
There was some sympathy
for your intentions.
Though not our actions.
Pity some of your partners
at Carnmore should be
on the other side of the bench.
How do you mean?
St. Aubyn Tresize,
Alfred Barbary...
They're magistrates,
are they not?
They may feel compelled
to take a stand.
And then there's the matter
of Matthew Sanson.
What of him?
Once this tale gets out,
George may feel obliged
to respond.
Why should he?
Matthew's a cousin.
Did you not know?
No, I did not.
(thunder)
Old tripe-for-brains be within.
Who?
Mark Daniel, moping and moaning
fit to make your lugs bleed.
There's talk of Keren
and Dwight.
Any truth in it?
Couldn't say.
Anything else we can't say?
About Verity, Blarney...?
I know as much as you.
ANDREW: "Since you brought
Verity and me together,
"I must tum to you
for further help.
"Francis is impossible.
"There can never be
a reconciliation.
Therefore, Verity must choose
between us."
Folks say she's brazen.
That she'll fling herself
at other men.
Have you asked her if it's true?
I haven't the heart to, Ross.
I can't put myself
to believe it.
But if a man can't
trust his wife...
You must have faith, Mark.
Without that, there's
no hope for a marriage.
JUD: Hope for marriage?
Pick me liver.
Best take it out 'fore it's not
to be cuckolded thrice a day
by every man, dog and mule
in the county.
(clears his throat)
(knocks)
I come to offer myself.
To help you with your work.
I can write, I can take notes.
But...
Oh, don't refuse me.
You've been so kind.
I must use my wits for
something, or I'll go mad.
It is an omen, mark my words!
It is a fiendish, black omen!
What is the matter with
the women of this family?
The men.
You think you could do better?
"CARY". What do we know?
What we know is
that Ross Poldark,
though clever, has a weakness.
Just the one?
He plays it straight.
And trusts others
to do the same,
but others have eyes and ears.
And they report.
What we've been trying
for some time to find out,
the site of the Carnmore Copper
Company smelting works.
And?
Trevaunance land.
They've struck a deal
with Tresidder's Mill.
GEORGE: For now, they have
enough copper to keep going,
but come the next auction...
CARY: We'll see they
come away empty-handed.
And the question is, will that
be enough to ruin them?
What more can we do, since
they deliberately withhold
the names of their shareholders?
There's no law against that.
It makes it considerably
more difficult
for us to exert pressure.
So... let's begin with the one
name we do know...
Jonathan Tresidder.
Banks with us, does he not?
CARY: He does indeed.
"GEORGE".
And has substantial loans.
Here's to the first chink
in the Poldark armor.
(Clink)
(baby crying)
I wish Jim could have seen
his child grow up.
You did all you could.
I wonder.
Ross, you cannot fight
all the world.
You can only make your own
small corner a fairer place.
Will anything come
of what you did?
It may. It may not.
Lay your flowers.
This is the first time
I've been sober in five days.